A web page (also written as webpage) is a document that is suitable to act as a web resource on the World Wide Web. When accessed by a web browser it may be displayed as a web page on a monitor or mobile device.

The web page usually means what is visible, but the term may also refer to a computer file, usually hypertext written in HTML or a comparable markup language. Web browsers coordinate various web resource elements for the written web page, such as style sheets, scripts, and images, to present the web page. Typical web pages provide hypertext that includes a navigation bar or a sidebar menu linking to other web pages via hyperlinks, often referred to as links.

On a network, a web browser can retrieve a web page from a remote web server. The web server may restrict access to a private network such as a corporate intranet. The web browser uses the Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) to make such requests to the web server.

A static web page is delivered exactly as stored, as web content in the web server's file system. In contrast, a dynamic web page is generated by a web application, usually driven by server-side software. Dynamic web pages help the browser (the client) to enhance the web page through user input to the server.
Contents

    1 Color, typography, illustration, and interaction
        1.1 Dynamic behavior
    2 Browsers
    3 Elements
    4 Rendering
    5 Creation and viewing
    6 Saving
    7 See also
    8 References
    9 Further reading

Color, typography, illustration, and interaction

Web pages usually include information such as the colors of text and backgrounds and very often contain links to images and other types of media to be included in the final view. Layout, typographic and color-scheme information is provided by Cascading Style Sheet (CSS) instructions, which can either be embedded in the HTML or can be provided by a separate file, which is referenced from within the HTML.

The latter case is especially relevant where one lengthy stylesheet is relevant to a whole website: due to the way HTTP works, the browser will only download it once from the web server and use the cached copy for the whole site.

Images are stored on the web server as separate files, but again HTTP allows for the fact that once a web page is downloaded to a browser, it is quite likely that related files such as images and stylesheets will be requested as it is processed. An HTTP 1.1 web server will maintain a connection with the browser until all related resources have been requested and provided. Web browsers usually render images along with the text and other material on the displayed web page.
Dynamic behavior

Client-side computer code such as JavaScript or code implementing Ajax techniques can be provided either embedded in the HTML of a web page or, like CSS stylesheets, as separate, linked downloads specified in the HTML. These scripts may run on the client computer if the user allows.
Browsers
Main article: Web browser

A web browser can have a graphical user interface, like Internet Explorer Microsoft Edge, Mozilla Firefox, Google Chrome, Safari, and Opera, or can be text-based, like Lynx or Links.

Web users with disabilities often use assistive technologies and adaptive strategies to access web pages.[1] Users may be color-blind, may or may not want to use a mouse perhaps due to repetitive stress injury or motor neurone problems, may be deaf and require audio to be captioned, may be blind and using a screen reader or braille display, may need screen magnification, etc.

Disabled and able-bodied users may disable the download and viewing of images and other media, to save time, network bandwidth or merely to simplify their browsing experience. Users of mobile devices often have restricted displays and bandwidth. Anyone may prefer not to use the fonts, font sizes, styles and color schemes selected by the web page designer and may apply their own CSS styling to the page. The World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) and Web Accessibility Initiative (WAI) recommend that web pages are designed with all of these options in mind.
Elements

A web page, as an information set, can contain numerous types of information, which is able to be seen, heard or interacted with by the end user:

    Perceived (rendered) information:

        Textual information: with diverse render variations.
        Non-textual information:
            Static images may be raster graphics, typically GIF, JPEG or PNG; or vector formats such as SVG or Flash.
            Animated images typically Animated GIF and SVG, but also Flash, Shockwave, or Java applet.
            Audio, typically MP3, Ogg or various proprietary formats.
            Video, WMV (Windows), RM (RealMedia), FLV (Flash Video), MPG, MOV (QuickTime)
        Interactive information: see interactive media.
            For "on page" interaction:
                Interactive text: see DHTML.
                Interactive illustrations: ranging from "click to play" images to games, typically using script orchestration, Flash, Java applets, SVG, or Shockwave.
                Buttons: forms providing an alternative interface, typically for use with script orchestration and DHTML.
            For "between pages" interaction:
                Hyperlinks: standard "change page" reactivity.
                Forms: providing more interaction with the server and server-side databases.

    Internal (hidden) information:
